---
title: Living in Language
date: August 4th, 2024
season: 2
seasonname: Living in Language
issue: 17
tags: language
description: "What does it mean to live in language? How can we use language not just descriptively, but generatively and creatively?"
image: "og/og-simple.png"
published: false
---

Welcome to Season 2 of 🌍 [Words Make Worlds](https://methodandmatter.com/words-make-worlds), _Living in Language_.

If you are new here, welcome! And if you’ve been here a while, thanks for sticking around. I’m really excited for Season 2, an exploration into what happens when we speak and how, as coaches and leaders, we can use language intentionally to build trust, increase collaboration, create new possibilities, and generate worlds.

Language is like the air we breathe. By the time we are adults we’ve been languaging for so many years that we hardly give it a second thought. From the moment we wake up to the time we go to bed, we language our existence. Now, if languaging were simply the act of describing the world, then I wouldn’t be writing this newsletter. There would be no need to examine how languaging creates our experience because as a descriptive tool language holds no generative power. But when we look closer we start to see that in language we create both ourselves and the world. Language is not just descriptive, but creative and generative. And when leaders and coaches begin to catch onto this, everything changes.

So! Languaging. You may be alarmed by how I am using the word language here (as a verb!) but I assure you this is intentional. I take this usage from the work of [Humberto Maturana](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1EPmMiaNKjf4LKIVnNw7dmIMh26Ske404/view?usp=share\_link), a Chilean biologist who astutely noted that “anything said is said by an observer.” This feels obvious, but the implications are important.

Each of us, as an observer, perceives the world uniquely. Not only because of how we were shaped through our upbringing, experiences, and culture, but also the structure of our biology. Our seeing doesn’t happen through the eyes alone, our seeing happens through our nervous system, emotional state, and awareness. I read the infamous quote attributed to Anaïs Nin, “We see the world not as it is, but as we are,” not as a statement about our character, but about our biology. How the world occurs to us is created through our mood, emotions, body, _and_ language. This is what Maturana is pointing to when he uses language as a verb. The act of languaging consists of observing _and_ speaking, and recursively being changed by what we say on what we see.

It is precisely this uniqueness, this difference between observers that gives us a clue that language cannot just describe the world as it is. If we each perceive the world uniquely then we each have a claim on how the world is. But if that’s the case, how can we ever make sense of things? One answer to that question can be found just by looking around or reading a history book - the world-generating capacity of language is attributed to a privileged few who were born with and/or have accumulated the right signifiers that their view of things is considered the “right” one (just think of managers you’ve had who feel, simply because of their positional power, they are always right and you’ll get a sense of what I mean).

Let’s look at an example of this in action (apologies for the political nature of this but the 2024 US Presidential electoral race has been occupying a great deal of my attention): for the last two decades (and more acutely since Trump’s time in the Oval Office), the ‘world’ of the United States has been generated through the languaging of conservative, white Evangelical Christian observers. What they language, what they name and create, reflects a vision of life in which women lose control of their autonomy and bodies, where anyone who isn’t white is suspected of being an illegal immigrant and threatened with deportation and prison, and where white supremacy is the norm and Christianity the faith. As someone who lives in the United States, let me tell you that at times it can feel like this is truly what people of this nation want and that there simply aren’t enough of us to push back against the tide of fascism.

For _years_ those of us with different views, with different ways of seeing the world, haven’t been able to mount an effective response in language. Until a week and a half ago when “weird” entered the political discourse and suddenly what felt like a powerful and threatening wave of Christian nationalism was exposed as bizarre and creepy. By labeling the views, actions, and beliefs of the MAGA crowd as "weird", the Democrats have created a distinction that generates new ways of seeing the political landscape. Through language there is now the space and energy for something else to emerge, new kinds of world making.  

This example is big and broad and taps into the zeitgeist, but what I am pointing to happens on a personal level as well. Let’s zoom in ([Eames Power of 10 style](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0fKBhvDjuy0)) to our inner critic. The inner critic is a particular kind of observer, one that occupies a negative view of our capabilities and effectiveness. Inhabiting a pervasive mood of dissatisfaction and frustration, the inner critic can only observe (and incessantly tell us) where we are falling short of expectations. And as part of our own observational facility, the inner critic, who we often mistake as ourselves, influences how we observe the world and create it through language.

Let’s look at that more closely. If our inner critic is super active and we are beating ourselves up for not being more productive, efficient, smarter, better, prettier, wealthier, name-your-flavor-of-criticism, that will absolutely influence our observations of ourselves, what is happening around us, and potential actions we can take. We will pay more attention to data that confirms the beliefs of the inner critic and discard evidence to the contrary. And this loop, this reflexive interaction of observation and language, creates our reality. Through languaging we have become lazy, stupid, worthless, pathetic which, I have to point out, is not an objective, descriptive statement about our character but the generative capacity of observation and language to create ourselves and the world.    

As unique observers we all language our existence in unique ways. What happens when we speak is that we reveal how the world appears to us. What matters to us, the beliefs that we hold to be true, what we think is worth paying attention to and what isn’t, what we hope for, and what we want to avoid. Language shows who we are and how we see the world.  

This is what I mean by “living in language”. Language is such a part of our material reality that we rarely stop to reflect on it, to understand the role it plays in creating our experience. We take language to be descriptive or a way of transmitting information, which it is some of the time, but our big mistake has been the assumption that this is all language does. What we are exploring this season in Words Make Worlds is the generative nature of language, how it can be used to create ourselves and the worlds we want to live into.

So as we begin this journey together I’d like to invite you to pay attention to how you use language. Listen to your inner dialogue and see what you can learn about how you language the world. And listen to the conversations you have with others and see if you can sense into what language reveals about each person and how they observe the world.

Happy languaging,

Andi
